So we talked about the core principles
of object oriented programming,
we had encapsulation, we had inheritance,
we have polymorphism.
The fourth and
final core principle of object
oriented programming is abstraction.
So abstraction is defined as
something that exists in theory,
but it does not have a concrete existence.
I see you all like, what?
[LAUGH] Let me give you an example.
So, shape is something that is abstract,
right?
It exists in theory, but
it doesn't have a concrete.
There's types of shapes and
those are concrete, but
shape as a concept on its own is abstract,
right?
And in order to declare
a class as abstract,
we use the abstract keyword
right before the word class.
This is a non-access modifier
that can be used on classes,
or it could even be used on methods, okay?
Why would you do something like this?
It's when you wanted to find
a template of a class or
a template of a method, but
you don't intend for it to be used as is,
you want someone else to implement that,
right?
If we were to think about,
any abstract thing like shape,
or whatever,
it's not designed to be instantiated.
I don't want you to create
a new shape instance, right?
It might be a type, but
not an instance because what
behaviors can it really have,
l how can you define that?
You only could define it once you know
the type of shape you're actually
working with.
So abstract classes,
they're designed to be extended and you're
pushing the burden of implementation
onto the child, the subclass.
So again, shape is an abstract concept.
It can perhaps specify some general
behaviors that a shape would have.
But it's too abstract of
a concept to actually define what
the behavior would be.
For example, if I had this shape class,
then it can't be instantiated.
Its purpose is to serve
as a superclass that
more specific subclasses can extend from.
Now an abstract method is
a method that has no body.
And we will put that non excess
modifier in front of the return type.
For an abstract method, only
the signature of the method is defined.
Again, it's not defined to be run as is,
is designed to be
overwritten by a subclass.
This is a great example because I have
the shape class and I have calculate area.
I cannot think of an implementation
to put inside of this method.
In shape,
how do you calculate the area of a shape?
Well, it depends on the shape, right?
That's exactly what you would say.
So that's what we mean, you can say,
look, if you have a shape,
you should provide a method
to calculate the area.
I don't know what that
implementation is going to be,
but you need to have one, okay?
So, we are going to create
an abstract shape class and
then, I'm gonna create
a new rectangle class.
I don't wanna do too much with
that other rectangle we have.
So we'll create a new rectangle
class that will inherit from shape.
So back to our IDE, we want to make
a new package called abstraction.
In abstraction,
we'll create a new class called shape.
And to make this class abstract,
what do we do?
>> Abstract after public.
>> Yes,
after public we would write abstract.
So that's what we do.
This class is now abstract.
Let's create the abstract method.
So we say abstract,
double calculate area.
Now you don't have to only have
abstract methods in an abstract class,
you can have some methods
that have a body.
So let's just add one of those for
fun, we'll say public void print.
And we'll print out that I am a shape.
All right, let's make the rectangle class.
Now, this is a great example that
I haven't explicitly called out,
but we're making a new rectangle class.
We had another rectangle
class that was in objects.
It's okay to have classes with the same
name as long as they're not in the same
package.
And of course there's no
relation between them.
All right, so in the rectangle class
we're going to extend from shape.
Write our weight, as soon as we do
this inheritance, we get an error.
Because if you're going to
inherit from an abstract class,
you must implement the abstract
methods that you have inherited,
or you can define yourself as
an abstract class as well.
So you have two options.
Implement the stuff that
needs to be implemented or
pass the buck yet again to your kid.
All right, so inside of the rectangle
class, let's go ahead and
implement the abstract
method that we inherited.
You could type this out manually,
but of course,
IntelliJ offers us some
nice ways to handle this.
So, if I hover over the error,
they give me some options.
I can just click this Implement methods.
It shows me which methods are abstract and
it added it there.
I do need to change the body here though.
All right, so
we'll change our calculate area
to length × width which we
haven't defined just yet
and rectangle, but we will, okay?
So in our rectangle class,
let's go ahead, we handled the part
about over overriding the abstract
methods that we inherited.
Now we can take care of our
own business and rectangles.
So let's make a couple of fields for
length and for width.
Let's just leave that for now,
we'll add more if we need to.
I guess we need to add a constructor
to set this stuff up though, right?
Otherwise we can't set the fields so
let's just do that much.
What's this type of constructor call?
>> All arcs?
>> Yes, all arcs.
I'm putting all of the fields
in the parameter list so
we can say, we don't have a setter?
[LAUGH], I might as well go ahead and
generate my getters and setters.
I was trying to be lazy, but.
Generate, getter and
setters for both, yes.
All right, and let's set the length.
And set the width.
Okay.
All right, now let's make a test class
that'll test the abstract stuff.
So in abstraction, we'll make
a class that we'll call ShapeTester.
Make your main method.
Okay, we're going to define this as shape,
which is the superclass,
which is abstract, right?
Shape, rectangle,
we cannot say new shape, why not?
>> Abstract.
>> Is abstract so you cannot instantiate
an abstract class, not possible.
So we would have to use
one of its subclasses.
When you say new rectangle,
make sure you're using the one that's
in this package and not the object one.
And let's just give it
a couple of numbers.
Okay, and I can say rectangle.print,
which comes from the shape class.
So that's normal inheritance, right?
By do that,
let's just test what that does.
It says I am a shape perfect that's
what we got from the shape class here.
And then let's test out the area, right?
So let's say rectangle.calculatearea.
And of course, it's going to
run the one from the rectangle
class that we have some
implementation for.
So that should be 35, yep.
Yes.
>> So an abstract class
probably can't be final then?
>> Can't be final?
Okay, that's a great question, right?
So, abstract, final,
that doesn't make sense, right?
Because that's exactly what it says,
a legal combination.
I love that question,
I love the way that they're thinking.
The purpose of the abstract class is to
be a template that will be implemented by
subclasses.
So to make yourself final means
no one can be a subclass,
no one can inherit from you,
and that doesn't make sense.
Good question.
>> You back to the shape duster?
>> Yeah.
>> That's an interesting question though.
So you can't extend an interface?
>> A final class?
>> No, an abstract class?
>> Yeah, you can, we did here.
>> Yeah.
>> So rectangle, extended shape.
>> Not extend or extend, right?
>> So a final class can't be extended.
An abstract class is meant to be extended.
So an abstract class can't be final.
>> Probably sealed as well, right?
>> What can't be?
>> Couldn't be sealed.
>> What?
>> Abstract class.
>> Can an abstract class be sealed?
Interesting, so there might be,
that might be possible
I don't see why not.
All sealed class, and
then we have to say wait what?
>> [CROSSTALK]
>> Must be final seal, yeah.
So then this would have to,
let's just say non-sealed here, yeah.
So that's fine,
you can have an abstract sealed class.
That was fun.
I've not done that before.
>> Wouldn't that be kind of unhelpful
because you're essentially creating
a class where you can't
do anything with it, but
you can't implement it either
because of the sealed.
>> You can do stuff with it, right?
You can do whatever you want
as long as you're on the list.
>> I see what you're saying, yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah, so, having a sealed
abstract class just limits who is
able to implement, those abstract methods,
>> Like
the bouncers letting you into the club.
>> Yes, that's right,
we're on the list [LAUGH].
All right, so key points to
remember about abstraction or
abstract classes and
methods are templates,
they're meant to be implemented
by their subclasses.
The classes in the methods
are declared abstract,
by using the abstract reserved words.
If a subclass inherits from
an abstract class, it must,
it's required to implement
the abstract methods of that class.
Or it has to declare itself as abstract.
I didn't show you that.
Let me show you that.
I told you that, but
I didn't show you that.
So, in rectangle, so
okay, shape is abstract.
Rectangle inherits from shape.
Let's say that they're, look,
I don't want to implement
the calculate area method.
Of course, this gives you an error.
So rectangle could say,
look, I'm abstract too.
And then they're off the hook.
And the reason why you might wanna
do this, so we just had one abstract
method and shape, there could be
20 abstract methods and shape.
And rectangle can say I only
need to implement five of
those the rest of them are not
really applicable to me.
So then rectangle would have to.
They could go ahead and
override those five abstract but
they would have to declare
themselves as abstract as well cuz
they have 15 abstract methods
that they have inherited.
Again, abstract classes
cannot be instantiated.
They are only to be used as a superclass.
>> Once in your example,
make the rectangle class abstract,
that child would have to implement
not only the five abstract
methods from rectangle, but
also the 15 that rectangle did not.
>> Yes.
>> Is that, maybe, why you make a default
method, if you change the parent,
you wouldn't have to require
all the children to implement.
>> Yes, but it's not an abstraction,
it'll be in the next topic we talk
about but yes that's the reason.